# CS 1331 Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming

## Instructors

* Christopher Simpkins, simpkins@cc.gatech.edu

**IMPORTANT**: All course-related electronic communications should be done through Canvas. If Canvas is not working and you wish to email a course instructor, include [CS1331 Student] in the subject of course-related email, e.g., "Subject: [CS1331 Student] Exam 2 Question." Professors are deluged with email. If we don't respond, don't take it personally. Just resend your email with a friendly reminder.

## Course Description

CS 1331 teaches students how to develop object-oriented solutions to computational problems. Students learn fundamental concepts of object-oriented programming, basic object-oriented design principles, further develop the programming skills learned in previous courses, write medium-sized object-oriented programs in a modern programming language, and -- as the first course required for computer science majors and minors -- get a deeper introduction to the field of computer science.

## Learning Outcomes

By the end of this course students will be able to define, describe and recognize examples of the principles of:

* statically typed variables;
* structured programming;
* fundamental object-oriented language features (encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism);
* ad-hoc polymorphism, run-time polymorphism (subtype polymorphism) and compile-time polymorphism (generics);
* exception handling;
* event-driven programming principles as they apply to graphical user interface (GUI) programs;
* basic GUI program design;
* recursive definitions of algorithms and data structures;
* "Big-O" run time analysis of algorithms;
* basic algorithms for searching and sorting; and
* basic data structures for linked lists, stacks, and queues.

Students will also be able to write, debug and predict the behavior of programs that use these principles in programs composed of up to 20 major abstractions (e.g., classes) in up to 20 source files.

## Requirements

### Grading

* Homeworks: 20%
* Quizzes: 10%
* Exams: 50%
* Final Exam: 20%

Grade Cutoffs: A: 90, B: 80, C: 70, D: 60

### Assignments

Bi-weekly homework programming assignments, three in-class written exams, three in-class programming quizzes, and an in-class written final exam.

#### Academic Integrity and Collaboration

We expect academic honor and integrity from students. Please study and follow the academic honor code of Georgia Tech: http://www.honor.gatech.edu/content/2/the-honor-code. You may collaborate on homework assignments, but your submissions must be your own. You may not collaborate on in-class programming quizzes or exams.

#### Due Dates, Late Work, and Missed Work

* Programming quizzes are due by the end of class. Homework assignments are due at 23:55 on the assignment's due date. Multiple resubmissions are allowed, so submit early and often so you aren't in a rush on the due date. Late submissions receive a 0.

* Unless otherwise announced, make-up exams are held at 11:00 on the Tuesday following the exam. Make-up exams are only given to students with special circumstances such as serious illness, hospitalization, death in the family, judicial procedures, military service, or official school functions. Provide us with a copy of your letter from the registrar in advance for official school functions. For other excused absences you must provide documentation to the Dean of Students **within one week of your return from illness/activity**. The Dean of Students will verifiy your excuse and send us a notice. Excusal from coursework or make-up opportunities are granted at the sole discretion of your instructor.

#### Regrades

To contest any grade you must submit an official regrade form to the Head TA **within one week of the assignment's original return date**. The original return date is the date the exam was first made available for students to pick up or the grade was posted online in the case of homework assignments and programming quizzes. Note that a regrade means just that -- we will regrade your assignment from scratch, which means you may end up with a lower score after the regrade.

### Class Participation

Lecture attendance is required. Some information may be presented in lecture and nowhere else. It is your responisibility to attend lecture regularly and pay attention.

## Course Outline

* Week 1 - Week 5: Element of Programming in Java (values, variables, control structures, classes)
* Week 6 - Week 8: Fundamentals of Object-Oriented Programming (inheritance, polymorphism)
* Week 8 - Week 14: OOP Case Studies (Java collections framework, Java GUI programming)
* Week 15 - Week 16: Algorithms and Data Structures

## Prerequisites

At least one of:

* Undergraduate Semester level CS 1301 Minimum Grade of C
* Undergraduate Semester level CS 1315 Minimum Grade of C
* Undergraduate Semester level CS 1321 Minimum Grade of C
* Undergraduate Semester level CS 1371 Minimum Grade of C

## Course Materials

* Required software: Java 8 SDK, available from [Oracle](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index-jsp-138363.html)
* Official textbook: Introduction to Java Programming, Comprehensive Version, 10th Edition by Y. Daniel Liang, ISBN-10: 0133761312, ISBN-13: 978-0133761313
* Course websites: all course materials will be on the public web site at [http://cs1331.gatech.edu](http://cs1331.gatech.edu). All student grade information will be on the course's T-Square site.

Note that the textbook is useful, but not required. We provide extensive lecture notes, example code, and programming exercises on the course web site.

## Non-Discrimination

The Institute does not discriminate against individuals on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, or veteran status in the administration of admissions policies, educational policies, employment policies, or any other Institute governed programs and activities. The Institute’s equal opportunity and non-discrimination policy applies to every member of the Institute community.

For more details see [http://www.policylibrary.gatech.edu/policy-nondiscrimination-and-affirmative-action](http://www.policylibrary.gatech.edu/policy-nondiscrimination-and-affirmative-action)
